
Operating Manual for DFM290


CONTENTS

TABLE 1: NOMENCLATURE AND UNITS	2
OPERATING MANUAL FOR DFM290	4
1.  INTRODUCTION	4
2.  HARDWARE	4
3.  LOADING THE PROGRAM	4
3.1  Reading the Information	4
3.2  Running the Program	5
3.3  Command-Line Options	5
4.  RUNNING THE PROGRAM	6
4.1  Selection 'C': Creating	6
4.2  Selection 'R': Reading a file	9
4.3  Editing	11
4.4  Deleting	11
4.5  Fixing	11
4.6  Selection 'S': The Same Material	11
4.7  The End	12
5.  DATA SETS, PARAMETERS AND THE MAPS	12
5.1 Data Sets	12
5.2 Material Parameters	13
5.3 The Map Variables	14
5.5 The Maps	15
6.  TUNING THE DATA 	16
6.1 Developing a Data Set	16
6.2 Tuning the Parameters	16
7.  THINGS THAT CAN GO WRONG	17
7.1  The program won't load	17
7.2  The program loads but refuses to read data or aborts when run
	17
7.3  The printer won't print   	17
7.4  The printer prints text or rubbish but not graphics	17
7.5  Run-time	18
7.6  Subtler problems	19
APPENDIX A:  The Mechanisms and Rate Equations	20
APPENDIX B:  Scaling Relations	21
APPENDIX C:  Data, Data Sets and SOurces	23
References	23
Index	24

D R A F T   O P E R A T I N G   M A N U A L  
F O R   
DFM290
A PROGRAM FOR CONSTRUCTING DEFORMATION MECHANISM MAPS  
by  
P.M. SARGENT
Cambridge University Engineering Department,  
Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, U.K.  
JUNE 1993
The program DFM290 is based on current models for deformation   
mechanisms, and is supplied with data files for a number of   
crystalline materials.  Every care has been taken in selecting the   
models and in critically assessing the data but further research will   
certainly improve on both.  The program aims to assemble the best of   
current thinking into a useful package.  No guarantee can be given,   
however, that all possible mechanisms and phenomena are included, or   
that inaccuracies do not exist in the data.  The user must consult the   
sources and form his own judgement.




TABLE 1: NOMENCLATURE AND UNITS

acD0c	Dislocation core diffusion:See core diffusion: 
pre-exponential term (m$/s)

b	Burgers vector (m)

dD0b	Grain boundary diffusion:See Boundary 
diffusion:Boundary diffusion pre-exponential term (m/s) ob

Dv	Lattice diffusion:See Volume diffusion:Volume 
diffusion coefficient (m3/s)

D0v	Pre-exponentials for volume (lattice) diffusion 
(m2/s)

g	Grain size (microns)

	Shear strain rate (s-1)

k	Boltzmann's constant (1.38 x 10-26 J/K)

u0, u300	Shear modulus at O K, at 300 K (GPa)

n	Creep exponent

Qb	Activation energy for boundary diffusion 
(kJ/mol)

Qc	Activation energy for core diffusion (kJ/mol)

Qv	Activation energy for volume (lattice) diffusion 
(kJ/mol)

Qplc	Activation energy for power-law creep 
(kJ/mol)

R	Gas constant (8.314 J/mol.K)

T	Temperature, absolute (K)

Tm	Melting point temperature, absolute (K)

	Shear stress (MPa)

	Yield strength (MPa)

	Reference:Stress stress for creep: see text 
(MPa)

OMEGA	Atomic volume of diffusing species (m3)

Eo	Activation energy for obstacle-controlled glide 
(-)

Ep	Activation energy for Peierls stress-
controlled glide (-)

	Temperature dependence of the shear modulus (-)


OPERATING MANUAL FOR DFM290

1.	INTRODUCTION

2.	REQUIRED HARDWARE AND OPERATING SYSTEM

3.	LOADING THE COMPILED PROGRAM

3.1	Reading files onto a hard-disc

3.2	Loading the program from the hard-disc

3.3	Loading the program from a floppy disc

3.4	Command-line-Line Options

4.	RUNNING THE COMPILED PROGRAM

4.1	Selection "C": Creating a data set

4.2	Selection "R": Reading a data set

4.3	Editing a data set

4.4	Deleting a data set

4.5	Duplicating a data set

4.6	Selection "S": The Same material

5.	DATA SETS, PARAMETERS, VARIABLES AND THE MAPS

5.1	Data sets

5.2	Material parameters

5.3	The variables

5.4	The maps

6.	TUNING THE DATA, AND TUTORIAL EXAMPLES

6.1	Developing a data set

6.2	Tuning the parameters

6.3	Tutorial Example 1: Map for copper

6.4	Tutorial Example 2: Map for alumina, an oxide ceramic

7.	THINGS THAT CAN GO WRONG

7.1	The program won't load

7.2	The program loads but won't read data

7.3	The printer won't print

7.4	The printer prints but not graphics

7.5	Run-time errors and subtler problems

APPENDIX A:	THE MECHANISMS AND RATE EQUATIONS

APPENDIX B:	SCALING RELATIONS

APPENDIX C:	DATA, DATA FILES AND SOURCES

REFERENCES

INDEX


OPERATING MANUAL FOR DFM290

1.  INTRODUCTION

This program constructs deformation mechanism maps for metals, 
ceramics and semiconductors.  It uses models and rate equations 
devised by a very large number of researchers which have been 
rationalised and summarised in the book "Deformation Mechanism Maps" 
by Frost and Ashby (1982), and further work published by Sargent and 
Ashby (see references). Sections 2 to 5 of this manual explain how to 
load and run the program.  Section 6 contains tutorial examples which 
introduce the user to the procedure for developing accurate maps.  
Section 7 lists some of the errors that can crop up in the use of the 
program, and how to fix them. The program code is written in Turbo 
Pascal version 5.5.  No knowledge of Pascal:See Turbo Pascal:, 
and no other sofware, is needed to run it.  The disc contains 
everything.

2.  HARDWAREHardware: See Printer, Graphics
The program is designed to run on an IBM PC or PS/2,or a 
Compaq or equivalent, operating under MS-DOS:Version 2.11 or 
higher, with at least 640K of RAM and optionally, an 8087 math co-
processor.  It is a great help to have a hard-disc.  The program 
is designed for a micro with a standard colour display (VGA, 
EGA or CGA), but will run perfectly well on a monochrome 
system (VGA or Hercules).  The only required peripheral is a 
printerprinter capable of graphics.  The standard IBM dot-
matrix printer printer or one of the Epson LX or LQ series 
printers is fine, but a Hewlett-Packard laserjet or equivalent 
will require extra software, which is not supplied with this 
package (see section 7.4). The compiled code is for a 286 or more 
recent processor, with a numeric coprocessor, but it can be recompiled 
for older machines without coprocessors very easily.

3.  LOADING THE PROGRAM

The disc contains DFM290 in compiled form, together with a number of 
data files. 

3.1  Data set:Reading READING THE FILES ONTO A HARD-DISC

The best way to run the program is from a hard-disc.  If your 
computer has one, then follow these steps.

(a)	Make a DIRECTORY to put the files in.  To do so, switch on the 
computer, wait for the C> prompt and type

		MD  \DFMAP 	(R) 

	(The slash is a backslash \ , not a  /.  The	(R) means 
"carriage" return" key).  This creates a directory called DFMAP.

(b)	Enter the new directory.  To do so, type

		CD  \DFMAP	(R)

(c)	Data set:ReadingRead the files into the directory.  To do 
this, put the supplied floppy disc in Drive A and type

		COPY A:*.* 	(R) 

	with no spaces after the A.  The discs sing for a bit, and 
finally you get the message

		18 FILES COPIED. 

Remove the disc and store it somewhere safe. 

3.2  RUNNING THE PROGRAM FROM THE HARD-DISC

Make sure you are in DRIVE C: and in the DFMAP directory, type: 

		CD \DFMAP	(R)

Then type:  

		DFM	(R) 

((R) means "carriage return").  

The Batch files batchfile called DFM.BAT loads graphics 
memory-resident software (needed to print the maps on your 
printer printer, see 7.4) and runs the program DFM290.  The 
opening screen appears.  It is described in a moment. 

3.3  RUNNING THE PROGRAM FROM THE FLOPPY DISC

(a)	Insert the floppy disc in DRIVE A:

(b)	Type 

		A: 	(R)

(c)	Wait for the  A>  prompt, and type:

		DFM	(R)

The Batch files batchfile DFM.BAT loads GRAPHICS.COM 
memory-resident software (which you need to print the maps on the 
printerprinter, see 7.4) then it runs DFM290.  The opening screen 
appears.  Section 4 tells you what to do next. 

3.4  COMMAND-LINE OPTIONS

The program has a number of options:See Command line which can be 
helpful if you are running a lot of data sets of data using your own 
MS-DOS batch files usage:     

		DFM290 <matlname> <options>

e.g.		DFMAP290 copper /f 
/w:\op\copper.lst /s-

where

<matlname> is the name of a set of materials parameters previously

loaded into the datafile, such as "copper"

<options>  are as below:

/h or /?	brief help and information only - this text

/f	fast option, no interaction with user

/d	as /f above, but with a 10 s delay for each map on the screen

/e	display exit codes only

/s+	produce a strain-rate map (default)default values

/s-	do not produce a strain-rate map

/t+	produce a temperature map (default)default values

/t-	do not produce a temperature map

/l	write a listing:To a printer of the material parameters to 
the printer printer

/w:<fn>	writes the listing :To a fileto a file instead 
of the printer

	(<fn> denotes full path & filename)

/o	produce an Olivetti plot (640 x 400) on screen

/c	produce a CGA plot (640 x 200) on screen



Invalid or incomplete options are ignored.



4.  RUNNING THE PROGRAM

The opening screen looks like this.

DFM290

	                           
	M E C H A N I S M   M A P S


           P. M. Sargent, Cambridge University

This program calculates and plots Deformation Mechanism Maps.  Details 
of the equations and of the models on which they are based are given 
in: H.J. Frost & M.F. Ashby, "Deformation Mechanism Maps". Pergamon 
Press, Oxford, UK. (1983).

       This software comes with NO WARRANTY.


Press  W for warranty information

Press  C for copying information
Press  H for help, including some useful hints 



PRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE

If you select  H  you get two screens-full of HELP, outlining the 
function of the program.  Press any other key, such as the space-bar, 
to proceed.  The screen displays:

DFM290 		30 Mar. 1990

CREATE OR READ A MATERIAL DATA SET

Press  C  to Create a data set for a new material. data 
set:Creating
Press  R  to Read an existing data set:Reading. 
Press  D  to Duplicate data and give it a new name.Data 
set:Duplicating

Press  H  for help screen. 
Press  A  for additional command-line information. Command line
Press  ^C at any prompt to quit (discarding data) 


MAKE SELECTION

Selection 'C' allows you to Data set: CreatingCreate a new data 
set for a material. Selection 'R' permits you to Data set:Reading 
an existing data set. Selection 'H' gives a help screen which reminds 
you of requirements for a valid material name (a material name can 
have up to 9 letters or numbers, and certain other symbols and it 
must not contain any spacesHelp Screen).

The next two subsections detail the operation of the 'C' and 'R' 
options.

4.1  SELECTION 'C': Data set:CREATING A FILE

The program contains special features to help you create and check 
data sets of material parameters and of map variables.  If you make 
the selection 'C' you will see:

DFM290

THE DATA FILE CURRENTLY CONTAINS 

         FE-ALPHA             TI-ALPHA          ZR-ALPHA
     ALUMINA              TI-BETA                ZR-BETA
      COPPER            CO-EPSLON              GERMANIUM
       LEAD             MAGNESIA               MAR-M200
       SI3N4              MOLYBDM                 NICKEL
    ROCKSALT                  SIC                SILICON
     SILVER               SS-304                 SS-316
   T-STEEL                  TIN               TUNGSTEN
   URANIA             Y-Ba-CuO              ALUMINIUM
POTASSIUM

	Enter NAME of Material ... 	copper



The upper part of the screen lists data set:Pre-existings of 
existing data.  Do not reuse these names unless you mean to overwrite 
the existing data, if you do, you will be asked to confirm your 
decision.  (The sets of data and names supplied may differ slightly 
from those listed here.)

Enter a new material data set name, following the rules (up to 9 
characters beginning with a letter, no spaces).  As an example: enter 
DUMMY.  Press return.

To be legal, a material name must have one through nine characters 
(either letters of the alphabet or numbers 0 through 9), and the 
special characters # % - ( ) $ !  .  Thus

	COPPER      MARBLE-5      TUNGSTEN      and      PMMA#1 

are all legal names.  The data sets are all stored in the same file 
MATLPARS.DAT.  This file can be edited data set:Editingusing any 
plain-text editor or most word-processors in "non-document" mode.  If 
you do edit the data file directly, it is sensible to do this on a 
copy and to keep a backup of your original.

Having given a material name, the list of material parameters 
appears: 

DFM290	INPUT PARAMETERS FOR	DUMMY 

0	Isomechanical Class:
1	Melting point Point	K               
2	T-dependence of Modulus

3:	Shear Modulus @ O K	GPa
4:	OK Flow Stress (lattice)
5:	OK Flow Stress (obstacles)
6:	Lattice Glide Actv. Activation Energy	(mu.b^3)
7:	Obstacle Glide Actv. Activation Energy	(mu.b^3)
8:	Pre-exp. Volume diffusion Diffusion	m^2/s
9:	Activ. energy, Vol. Diff.	kJ/mol
10:	Pre-exp. Bdry Diffusion	m^3/sBoundary 
diffusion

11:	Activ. energy, Bdry.Diff.	kJ/mol
12:	Pre-exp. Core diffusionDiffusion	m^4/s
13:	Activ. energy, Diff.	kJ/mol
14:	Power Law Creep Exponent
15:	Reference: Stress stress, P-L creep	MPa
16:	Activ. energy for P-L creep	kJ/mol
17:	Burgers vector	m
18:	Atomic volume Volume	m^3


EDIT THE FILE ?   (Y/N)

The first parameter is the "isomechanical class"Isomechanical 
ClassClass: See Isomechanical Class:.  Change the default 
("unknown") by pressing the Tab key, you can go back by pressing the 
Shift and Tab key together.  When you find the description that most 
closely describes your new material, press the Return key.  All the 
rest are numeric. The PARAMETERS are more defined fully in Section 
5.1.  Enter the best estimates you can, but put zeros (0) where you 
don't know a value. When you enter zero, the program calls up scaling 
relations to estimate values for the missing parameters, using methods 
which are described in APPENDIX B.  When the table is full (it goes 
over two pages), you will be asked whether you wish to edit it.  
Answer "N" for "no" this time.  You will then be asked whether you 
wish to save it, press "Y" for "yes" when prompted.  Data 
set:Editing is discussed in a moment.

DFM290	Data set:Creating a new file for
	DUMMY 

17	Burgers vector	m	3.5E-10 
18	Atomic volumeVolume	m^3 
19	Phonon dragDrag Coefficient 
20	Electron drag Drag Coefficient 
21	Power-Law Breakdown Stress 
22	Diffusion: Cut-off stress 
23	Phase Change Temperature	K

ENTER PARAMETERS

The list of VARIABLES now appears.

DFM290	INPUT VARIABLES FOR	COPPER

1	NumberofProgramSteps	=	25
2	Grainsizem	=	3.OE-05
3	Lowerlimit,S/muaxis	=	1.OE-06
4	Upperlimit,S/muaxis	=	0.01
5	Lowerlimit,T/TMaxis	=	0
6	Upperlimit,T/TMaxis	=	1
7	Firststrain-ratecontour1/s	=	1.OE-14
8	Multiplier:strainrates	=	100
9	Numberstrain-ratecontours	=	10
10	Lowerlimit,StrainRateaxis1/s	=	1.OE10
11	Upperlimit,StrainRateaxis1/s	=	1.OE-4
12	HighestTemperaturecontourK	=	1356
13	TemperaturebetweencontoursK	=	100
14	Numbertemperaturecontours	=	10

EDIT THE FILE   (Y/N)

These map VARIABLES govern the choice of plot, the range of the axes, 
the values of variables which are to be held constant in a given 
plot, and the number of program steps and they include also the grain 
size of the material.  A full description is given in Section 5.2.  If 
you already know some or all of these, enter them.  If not, enter 
zeros (0).  The program automatically replaces zeros by reasonable 
starting values.  When the table is full, decline to edit it by 
pressing 'N' then save it by pressing 'Y'.  (Data set:EditingEdit 
it if you wish, using the procedure described in Section 4.3). You are 
now given an opportunity to type a description of the data, your 
sources and comments.  Type anthing you like, and finish by pressing 
the 'Alt' key and the 'W' key at the same time.  You will then be 
given an opportunity to edit your description.

DFM290  Data set:Creating a new reference for  DUMMY           30 
Mar. 1990





















Use the cursor keys, Finish with "Alt-W". 

You now have a complete set of files for DUMMY.  You are asked if you 
want a printout: See Listing: (a printed list) of the data.

DFM290     Immediate printout for     COPPER 

SELECT TYPE OF PRINTOUT
Press   N   No Listing.    
Press   O   an Ordinary Listing.    
Press   E   an Epson dot-matrix  REDUCED SIZE  Listing.    
Press   L   a Laser-printer  REDUCED SIZE  Listing.Laserjet



Press appropriate key   (N/O/E/L)  If you type 'O', 'E' or 'L' then 
the tables plus any data check DATA CHECK messages (see next 
paragraph) are printed. 

The program now checks the files against known limits, using 
isomechanical scaling laws described in Appendix B.  You will see    

DFM290          CHECK ON INPUT DATA FOR COPPER 

-----------  DATA  CHECK  COMPLETE  ----------


The RUN-TIME for this map is roughly  =   61 seconds 



RE-EDIT  FILES BEFORE PROCEEDING ?  (Y/N)

Any parameter or variable which lies outside the expected, normal 
range is flagged: a message appears on the screen.  A DATA-CHECK 
data check message does not necessarily mean that the datum is 
wrong, but it is suspect or very unusual.  You should check it.  
Physically unreasonable data will cause the program to abort.  If it 
does, start again by typing  DFM  and look hard at the DATA-CHECK 
data check messages when they appear.

Below this is an estimate of the run-time needed to plot one map it 
depends roughly linearly on the number of steps and on the number of 
contours (a map with 10 contours and 20 steps takes about 20 seconds 
one with 150 steps takes 6 minutes on a PS/2-50).  Below this is the 
question

'RE-EDIT THE FILES BEFORE PROCEEDING?'. If you are happy with the 
files as they are, type 'N'.  The program then calculates and plots 
the maps.  They are described in Section 5. When a map is completed, 
pressing the space-bar will cause it to go on to the next.  After the 
last map, an opportunity to finish is given (see section 4.7 below) 
and, if you wish to continue, the main menu reappears.  If you wish to 
stop a map in the middle, press the 'Esc' key.  This aborts the map.  
Then press space-bar to go on to the next as usual.

4.2  SELECTION 'R': READING A FILE

To read an existing data set:Reading(rather than create a new 
set), make the selection 'R' (instead of 'C') at the main menu.  The 
list of available datasets data set appears, as on Page 7.  You 
are asked for a name: enter one of the names on the screen.  The name 
must appear exactly as on the screen (except that lower and upper case 
letters can be interchanged).  If you enter an invalid name the 
program will ignore it and you will have to type it again correctly.

Enter a name (COPPER for instance) and press return.  The name appears 
in white.  If it is what you want, accept it by typing 'Y'. The table 
of material parameters for COPPER appears:



DFM290	INPUT PARAMETERS FOR	COPPER

0 Isomechanical Class:	fcc
1 Melting point Point K	=	1356
2 T-dependence of Modulus	=	0.4823715
3 Shear Modulus @ O K GPa	=	53.566593
4 OK Flow Stress (lattice)	=	6.3E-03
5 OK Flow Stress (obstacles)	=	1.3E-03
6 Lattice Glide Actv. Activation Energy (mu.b^3)	=	0.05
7 Obstacle Glide Actv. Activation Energy (mu.b^3)	=	0.5
8 Pre-exp. Volume diffusion Diffusion m^2/s	=	6.2E-05
9 Activ. energy, Vol. Diff. kJ/mo1	=	207
10 Pre-exp. Bdry Diffusion m^3/s	=	5.12E-15
11 Activ. energy, Bdry.Diff. kJ/mo1	=	105
12 Pre-exp. Core diffusionDiffusion m^4/s	=	1.0E-24
13 Activ. energy, Core diffusionDiff. kJ/mo1	=	117
14 Power Law Creep Exponent	=	4.8
15 Reference:Stress stress, P-L creep MPa	=	35
16 Activ. energy for P-L creep kJ/mo1	=	197



EDIT  THE  DATA ?    (Y/N)





DFM290	INPUT PARAMETERS FOR	COPPER


17	Burgers vector m	=	2.56E-10
18	Atomic volumeVolume m^3	=	1.18E-29
19	Phonon dragDrag Coefficient	=	6.OE-10
20	Electron drag Drag Coefficient	=	2.OE-08
21	Power-Law Breakdown Stress	=	1.OE-03
22	Diffusion: Cut-off stress	=	0.3
23	Phase change Temperature K	=	1356
		PgUp for more

EDIT THE FILE ?    (Y/N)



and you are given the opportunity to edit it.  this is followed by the 
map Variables, again with the edit option, and finally the 'reference' 
or comment text. Bibliographic Information

After the material 'Parameters' and the map 'Variables', there is an 
opportunity to add a textual reference:Text to the source of the 
information and perhaps a few comments.  The text can be edited 
whenever it appears on the screen, and can be changed by overtyping:

 DFM290        REFERENCE DESCRIPTION FOR COPPER  

COMMERCIAL PURITY COPPER 

Data are from 

Frost H.J. and Ashby M.F. "Deformation Mechanism Maps", Pergamon 
Press, Oxford (1982) and from 

Swinkels F.B. and Ashby M.F. Acta Metall. 29 (1981) 259 and 

Helle A.S., Easterling K.E. and Ashby M.F. Acta Metall. 33 (1983) 
2163.

EDIT  THE  DATA ?     (Y/N) 

Use the cursor (arrow) keys to move to where your wish to edit. 
Finish by pressing the <Alt><W> keys together ('W' stands for 
'windup'. Again, the offer of editing.  Decline in with an 'N' for the 
moment. You are asked whether you want a hard copy or not.  Accepting 
('O', 'L', or 'E') dumps the tables, plus any later DATA CHECKdata 
check  messages, to the printer. printer The program then 
executes a DATA CHECKdata check  and displays any material 
parameters or variables which lie outside the normally expected range.  
Take DATA CHECKdata check  seriously.  If one appears, make sure 
that the number you entered is in the right units and has the right 
sign.  Physically unreasonable data cause the program to abort.  If it 
does, you have to start again by typing  DFM290.

DFM290          CHECK ON INPUT DATA FOR COPPER 

-----------  DATA  CHECK  COMPLETE  ----------
The RUN-TIME for this map is roughly  =   61 seconds 

RE-EDIT  FILES BEFORE PROCEEDING ?  (Y/N)

The words DATA CHECKdata check  COMPLETE mean what they say.  
Below appears an estimate of the run time per map it depends on the 
number of steps and number of contours.  If the run-time is too long, 
or you have second thoughts about other parameters or variables, 
accept the offer of re-edit.  Otherwise press 'N'.  The program then 
computes and displays the maps. 

4.3  DATA SET:EDITING A SET OF DATA

Whenever a set of data is displayed, the message

EDIT THE DATA  (Y/N) ? 

will appear, sooner or later, along the bottom line of the display. If 
you accept ('Y'), you are prompted for the line-number that you wish 
to edit.  Enter the number and press (R).  The descriptor for that 
line appears on the bottom line of the display.  Enter the new value 
and press (R).  It immediately appears in the table, and (on 
colour displays) the edited line is picked out in white.  The 
bottom line now reads

FINISHED EDITING  (Y/N) ? 

The response 'N' gives you another go.  The response 'Y' terminates 
editing of that file and confronts you with

SAVE THE DATA  (Y/N) ?

It is usually best to save it - if you don't, you have no record of 
the values.  If you do, you overwrite the previous version of that 
data set.  Watch out for DATA CHECKdata check  messages, and 
check any change that you have made with special care if one 
appears.  You can get a hard copy of the edited files on the printer 
printerimmediately before the maps are calculated even if you 
haven't saved the data.. 

4.4  .iData set:DELETING A SET OF DATA

If your disc gets too full, you may wish to delete some of the data 
data set:Deletings it contains.  To delete a file, exit from the 
DFM290 program (press 'Q' for Quit when prompted, or press the 
<Ctrl>C keys at any prompt).  The C:\DFMAP> or A:\> prompt appears.  
Use a word processor or text editor to edit the file MATLPARS.DAT and 
delete all files beginning with the name of the material you wish to 
discard.  But be careful. Once they are gone, they are gone. 

4.5  Data set:DuplicatingDUPLICATING A DATA SET

Selection 'D' on the main menu presents the list of existing material 
data sets and asks for the original material, and then a new name for 
the copy.  It then leads directly in to the editing screens since the 
normal use for this option is to make some small number of changes to 
an already loaded data set. 

4.6  SELECTION 'S': THE SAME MATERIAL

After all the maps have been produced, the main menu reappears - with 
an extra option, 'S':Data set:Same 

DFM290		30 Mar. 1990 

CREATE OR READ A MATERIAL DATA SET

Press  S  for the same material.
Press  C  to Create a data set:Creating for a new material.
Press  R  to Read an existing data set:Reading.
Press  D  to Duplicate data and give it a new name.Data 
set:Duplicating

Press  H  for help screen.
Press  A  for additional command-line information.Command line
Press ^C  at any prompt to quit (discarding data).^C:See 
<Ctrl><Break>:


MAKE SELECTION 

which, if selected, retains the same data as used in the previous maps 
without reloading it from disc.  (Note that if the data had been 
edited and not saved to disc, then it is the edited data which will be 
used again). 

4.7  THE END

After the maps are produced, an opportunity to finish quit 
exit the program is given:

TO  QUIT  TYPE   "Q"

TO  CONTINUE,  PRESS  ANY  OTHER  KEY

5.  DATA SETS, PARAMETERS AND THE MAPS 

5.1  DATA SETS

A number of data sets are provided with the program, and more can 
be created by using the Create and Duplicate options from the main 
menu.  A Data Set for a material consists of a set of 
Parameter values, a set of Variable values, and some 
Bibliographic information which are described below.  The Data Sets 
supplied with the program are listed in Table 5.1.

TABLE 5.1:   DATA SETSdata set

DATA NAME	DESCRIPTION

COPPER	Commercial purity copper
LEAD	Commercial purity lead
NICKEL	Commercial purity nickel
SILVER	Commercial purity silver

TUNGSTEN	Commercial purity tungsten
MOLYBDM	Commercial purity molybdenum
FE-ALPHA	Commercial purity BCC iron
TI-ALPHA	Commercial purity alpha (HCP) titanium

TI-BETA	Commercial purity beta (BCC) titanium
ZR-ALPHA	Commercial purity alpha (HCP) zirconium
ZR-BETA	Commercial purity beta (BCC) zirconium
TIN	Commercial purity tin

MAR-M200	Superalloy MAR-M200
SS-304	Grade 304 stainless steel
SS-316	Grade 316 stainless steel
T-STEEL	Tool steel

ROCKSALT	Sodium chloride, rock salt
ALUMINA	Commercial aluminium oxide ceramic
MAGNESIA	Commercial magnesium oxide ceramic
URANIA	Uranium dioxide

CO-EPSLON	Epsilon phase cobalt
Y-BA-CUO	Yttrium-barium-copper oxideY-Ba-CuO
ZIRCONIA	Zirconium dioxide
GERMANIUM	Germanium, semiconductor purity

SILICON	Silicon, semiconductor purity
SIC	Alpha silicon carbide
SI3N4	Silicon nitride
INSB	Indium antimonite, semiconductor purity



These data provide a starting point only.  They are derived from 
measurements on a wide variety of different batches of material and 
have not been checked.  It is essential that the data are tuned to 
match the particular batch of material with which you are working.  
The procedure for doing this is outlined in Section 6.  The DFM290 
program corrects mistakes which were present in earlier Fortran 
programs so datasets from ref. (1) will require re-evaluation against 
even the old experimental data. 

5.2  MATERIAL PARAMETERS

The material Parameter:See Parameter: parameters describe the 
properties of the material you wish to model.  At the very least, you 
must know Parameter 0, the isomechanical class, and 
Parameter 1: The melting point.  If you know no other (and 
enter zeros) the program makes sensible estimates for the rest 
(Appendix B), enters them and proceeds.  But you cannot expect the 
maps to be of any real value if this is all you provide. As you add 
more data, the estimates for the remaining blanks become more 
accurate.  The idea is to let you compute a first guess for the map 
it can then be refined by using data from actual yield and creep 
experiments.

The other MATERIAL PARAMETERS are the obvious ones that are needed to 
evaluate the models of deformation mechanisms: modulus, yield 
strength, diffusion :See Volume, Boundary, Core:coefficients, 
creep constants, etc.  All are in SI units.  Stresses are in MPa, 
shear modulus in GPa.  The creep parameters need a bit more 
explanation, given below, and are discussed

fully in Appendix B.  In slightly more detail, then:

Parameter 0:	Isomechanical class.

Parameter 1:	Melting point, Tm, of the solid, in units 
of degrees Kelvin (K).

Parameter 2:	The temperature dependence of the shear 
modulus:	it is entered as a positive number (e.g. 0.5).

Parameter 3:	Shear modulus, , for the material at room 
temperature, in units of Giga-Pascals (GPa or GN/m2).

Parameter 8:	The pre-exponential for lattice diffusion, D, 
in units of metres squared per second (m2/s).

Parameter 9:	The activation energy for lattice 
diffusion, Q , in units of kilojoules per mole (kJ/mol).

Parameter 10:	The pre-exponential for grain boundary 
diffusion, D  the usual pre-exponential is multiplied here by the 
boundary thickness (usually about 2 atom diameters), so the units are 
metres cubed per second (m3/s).

Parameter 11:	The activation energy for grain boundary 
diffusion, Q , in units of kilojoules per mole (kJ/mol).

Parameter 12:	The pre-exponential for dislocation core 
diffusion, ac D0c , units of metres to the fourth per second (m4/s).

Parameter 13:	The activation energy for core diffusion, 
Qc, in units of kilojoules per mole (kJ/mol).

Parameter 14:	The power-law creep exponent, n. Is the 
dimensionless exponent in the power-law creep equation = A. ( / ) 
. exp (- Q /RT) where is the shear strain rate caused by a shear 
stress , and n, A and Q are creep constants.

Parameter 15:	The reference:Stress stress for power-law 
creep, , an unfamiliar quantity. It is the stress required to cause a 
steady tensile creep rate of 10 /s at a temperature of one half of the 
absolute melting temperature. This way of characterising creep has a 
number of advantages. For details see Appendix B. 

Parameter 16:	The activation energy for power-law creep, 
Q , in units of kilojoules per mole (kJ/mol).

Parameter 17:	Burger's vector, b:the dislocation slip 
distance (in metres).

Parameter 18:	The atomic volume, OMEGA, in units of cubic 
metres (m).

Some of the parameters will need further adjustment to give an 
accurate map guidance in doing this is provided in Section 6.  When 
modelling an alloy or a ceramic the atomic volume and the diffusion 
coefficients are those for the slowest diffusing species if this (as 
is usual) is rate-controlling in mass transport.

A listing of some of the Parameter data sets provided with the 
program is given in Appendix C.  Tables of conversion factors for 
units are given in the inside covers of this manual.

5.3  THE MAP VARIABLES

The map Variable:See Variable VARIABLES include everything that is 
not a material property.

Briefly, they are:

Variable 1:	An important variable - the number of program 
steps. The value 30 gives a map very quickly, and is useful to 
check that the axes are set correctly.  Increasing the number of 
steps increases the precision, but it also increases the run-time, 
roughly in proportion to the number of steps.  Use 150 for a really 
precise map. The program resets numbers less than 2 to 2 and it 
resets numbers greater than 300 to 300 (default : 40).

Variable 2:	The grain size (in microns, 10   metres).

Variables 3 & 4      The end values of the range of normalised 
shear stress (  / ) axis.  Default values: 10-6   and 10-2 .

Variables 5 & 6:     The end values of the range of homologous 
temperature (T/Tm) axis.  Defaults 0.0 and 1.0.

Variable 7:	Lowest contours:Strain rate contour.  
Defaults 10    s  .

Variable 8:	The Contours:Multiplying factor by which 
the strain-rate increases between contours (default value : 100).

Variable 9:	The number of contours :Number of(default 
: 10, giving, with the other default values, contours which span the 
range 10    to 10  s .

Variables 10 & 11      The range of strain rates for the axes 
of the strain-rate/stress plot

Variable 12:	The temperature of the highest 
contours:Temperature contour (K).

Variable 13:	The Contours:Temperature Difference 
between temperature contours (K).

Variable 14:	The number of temperature 
contours:Temperature.

If you enter zeros when creating or editing a Parameter or 
Variable file, the program inserts the default values listed 
above. The quick way to get started with the program is to enter zeros 
for everything. Default values

5.5.THE MAPS

Three classes of mechanism contribute to the total strain: plastic 
yielding, power-law creep, and diffusion.  The program uses 
rate equations for each mechanism, adding the rates when 
appropriate.  The results are presented as Strain-rate-contour, Stress 
/ Temperature axes maps, or as temperature-contour, Strain-Rate / 
Stress axes maps.

Examples of the two sorts of map are show in Figure 5.1 and 5.2. The 
left-hand and bottom axes show the  normalised variables the 
right-hand and upper axes show the  absolute values  of the variables. 
The numbers at either end of the absolute scales correspond to the 
marker axis nearest to that end of the axis.  If (as occasionally 
happens when scales are expanded) the axis has only one marker on it, 
the same number appears at both ends.

The box in the top-right corner shows, in order:

(a)	The  material name data name  (as listed in Table 5.1).

(b)	The  grain size, in microns. 

At the bottom left, the strain rates corresponding to the first and 
last  strain rate contours  are listed.  The contours differ by a 
constant multiplying factor which you can set (Variable 15).  Here 
it is 100.  The  current date  is printed at the top right.

The axis can be chosen to cover any sensible range you like: you can, 
for instance, blow up the bit from  T/Tm = 0.5 to T/Tm = 0.55  
homologous temperature to fill the whole diagram by setting the 
range of the temperature axis to these values (Variables 6 and 7).  As 
an example, the boxes marked on Figures 5.1a and 5.2a are shown, 
expanded by changing the appropriate variables, in Figures 5.1b and 
5.2b.

Each map is divided by heavy broken lines into fields showing the 
range of dominance of a given mechanism.  They are identified by 
abbreviations listed in Table 5.2.

The best way to develop a map is to use a small number of program 
steps (say 20) to start with, displaying the map on the screen 
quickly, until you have the axis ranges, contour numbers and spacing, 
and so on, to your satisfaction.  Save the data sets at each 
stageData set:Saving.  When you are happy, change the number of 
program steps to 150 and rerun. Print the map by pressing the print 
screen key <PRT SCR>.  Examples which illustrate all these points 
are given in the next section.

	TABLE 5.2  FIELD NAMES AND DESCRIPTIONS 

FIELD	DESCRIPTION 

PEIERLS	Yield, dislocation motion limited by 
Peierls stress drag 

PHONON	Yield, dislocation motion limited by 
Phonon dragDrag (relativistic and non-relativistic) 

RECRYST	Area of the map where dynamic  
recrystallization is expected  

OBSTCLE  Deformation by plastic yielding when the dislocation 
glide is limited by obstacles  

V-DIFF	Deformation by volume (lattice) diffusion  of 
vacancies 

B-DIFF	Deformation by grain-boundary diffusion of 
vacancies 

PLC-LT	Low-temperature power-law creep (core 
diffusion) 

PLC-HT	High-temperature power-law creep  

6.	TUNING THE DATA AND TUTORIAL EXAMPLES



6.1	DEVELOPING A DATA SET



6.2	TUNING THE PARAMETERS



6.3	TUTORIAL EXAMPLE 1: MAP FOR COPPER

6.4	TUTORIAL EXAMPLE 2:	MAP FOR ALUMINA, AN OXIDE CERAMIC

7.  THINGS THAT CAN GO WRONG 

7.1  THE PROGRAM WON'T LOAD   

(a)	Disc in wrong disc drive.  

	Change to DRIVE A: if you are running from the floppy disc, 
or to C:\DFMAP if from the hard-disc.   

(b)	The system reports a Sector Read error, or complains that the 
DOS is wrong.  

	You have booted the system with an operating system which is not 
compatible with that used to make the DFM290 disc. Insert the DFM290 
Disc in DRIVE A: and either switch the computer off and then on again, 
or press <Ctrl><Alt><Del> all at once.  The computer will boot 
from your hard  disc. The compiled version supplied was compiled 
using MS-DOS 6.0 but it has been tested (not extensively) with 3.3, 
4.01 andd 5.0.  

(c)	The program appears to load, but aborts before the first screen 
appears.  

	Check that you are running the program from a directory 
which contains the appropriate Borland Graphics Interface file 
for your graphics system.  This is EGAVGA.BGI for PS/2 computers.  
A full set is supplied on the disc.  If you are a Turbo Pascal 
programmer, ensure that you are using the Turbo Pascal 6.0 
versions with DFM290. Check also that you have sufficient 
memory, DFM290 requires 248K.  Use the program  MEMMAP.COM 
supplied on the floppy disc to check. (Documentation is in the 
file MEMMAP.DOC).

7.2  THE PROGRAM LOADS BUT REFUSES TO READ DATA OR ABORTS WHEN RUN   

The program loads, and reads files, but the data sets they contain is 
blank or nonsense and the program aborts when you try to plot a map.  
It is probable that the file MATLPARS.DAT is data 
set:Corruptedcorrupted.  Recopy it from the original DFM290 floppy 
disc. 

7.3  THE PRINTER WON'T PRINT   printer

(b)	Printer not switched on, is not connected properly, or is out of 
paper. 

(b)	Printer set OFF LINE.   

(c)	Printer incorrectly set up.  Go through setup procedure for 
printer given in the documentation of your computer and printer.  Try 
using the  MS-DOS MODE command: 

		MODE LPT1:80,6	(R).

7.4  THE PRINTER PRINTS TEXT OR RUBBISH BUT NOT GRAPHICS 
printer

This is the most complex and difficult part of the system.  It is 
nothing to do with DFM290, screen dumps are always difficult.   

(a)	The printer is of the wrong sort and won't handle graphics.   

(b)	You omitted to load .iGRAPHICS.COM before running DFM290.  Press 
<Ctrl><Break> and run DFM290 by typing DFM <enter>.   

(c)	You loaded GRAPHICS.COM from some other hard or floppy 
disc, and it is for the wrong version of DOS. It is essential that 
the program GRAPHICS.COM which is loaded by DFM.BAT matches the 
version of MS-DOS that you use.  either re-boot (press 
<Ctrl><Alt><Del> ) with the floppy discsupplied in drive A:, 
and use GRAPHICS.COM supplied, or copy you own copy of 
GRAPHICS.COM  from your MS-DOS disc into directory C:\DFMAP.   

(d)	Users of PS/2 and machines with EGA graphics adapters 
may need to run the program with the /c option to get the lower 
resolution CGA graphics on screen (type "DFM /c" to run the 
mapping program) which can be more easily printed.  If you insist an 
using MS-DOS:Version 3.3. with a VGA display you will have to 
do this.

(e)	If you have an Olivetti or AT&T computer then you can 
get higher resolution plots on the screen by using the /o option when 
you run the program, e.g. DFM /o.  (This may also work with some 
Compaq computers.)  If you want to do screen dumps of these plots 
you will need to read your MS-DOS documentation of the 
GRAPHICS command very carefully, and you will certainly need to 
use the GRAPHICS.COM program which came with your computer.   

(f)	If you have a Hercules graphics adapter then the 
appropriate dump program screen dump program is HGC.COM or 
MGC.COM, instead of GRAPHICS.COM  and it should have been 
supplied with your computer. One solution to graphics dump 
problems is to purchase a commercial screen-capture utility which 
supports a wid range of printers - including HP LaserJets.  We have 
found Graph-Plus to be effective.  It can be ordered from "Grey 
Matter", 2 Prigg Meadow, Ashburton, Deven TG13 7DF, or see their 
regular advertisements in Byte magazine (tel. +44 (364) 53499).  
Alternatively, your word processor or desktop publishing program may 
have a screen-capture utiltiy with which you can dump screens into 
your word processor.  MS Word 5.0 for DOS does this. Remember: run 
GRAPHICS before running DFM290 if you want to dump the plot to a 
dot-matrix  printer.  Do this by running the program GRAPHICS.COM  
supplied with the MS-DOS operating system which came with your 
computer.  The batch file DFM.BAT does this automatically..

You can get a hard copy of the screen by pressing the <PRT SCR> key 
when the plot has finished and is labelled on the screen.  This key 
may require the shift key to be pressed to be effective.

7.5  RUN-TIME ERRORS

Run-time errors halt the running of the program and abort it.  
To recover, you have to exit from the batch file  DFM  when prompted, 
then retype  DFM  and start again.  (If you want to abort the program 
deliberately, press the <Ctrl><Break> keys.  It only works when the 
program is paused, awaiting an instruction.  When it is plotting, 
however, it checks the keyboard intermittently, so while it will stop, 
it may take a while to respond.)  A run-time error gives an error 
message which looks like this:

Run-time error  160 at 0779:6041
Run-time error 103 at 0DF1:002E 

The origins of run-time errors are these: 

(a)	The printer was not switched on when you tried to print 
(error 160) or it is out of paper (error 159). 

(b)	You pressed the <Ctrl><Break> Keys in the middle of the 
program run  (error 103). 

(c)	You read a data set with wildly incorrect numbers in it.  

	Some parameters have to be positive (and, when properly 
chosen, always are) positive others, non-zero.  Errors of this sort 
result in the program dividing by zero, or taking the square root of a 
negative number, and that gives Run-time errors 200 to 207 (but 
see 7.6 below).  

	Reload DFM290, check the data file MATLPARS.DAT, and look at 
the DATA CHECK data check messages when they appear.  The program 
contains numerous checks, and inserts default values which, as far 
as possible, prevent this happening.  But you are much cleverer than 
it is, and you may find a way round the protection. 

(d)	Error 150 occurs if you try to save the data sets to a file 
on a disc which is write-protected. In all cases, the only solution is 
to abandon the batch file and type DFM  to reload and start again.  In 
extreme cases, you may have to turn off your computer, wait 10 
seconds, and turn it back on again before you type  DFM  again. 
Floppy disc:Full Hard-disc:Full Data set:Saving 
Disc:See Hard-disc, Floppy disc:

7.6  SUBTLER PROBLEMS

There is always the possibility that "resident" programs which are 
loaded and stay in memory while DFM290 runs may cause problems.  
If a persistent error occurs, reboot your computer and run DFM290 
as the first program you run.  Examine your CONFIG.SYS and 
AUTOEXEC.BAT files for programs and device drivers.  Use the 
program MEMMAP.COM (supplied on the disc) to investigate the 
memory use in your computer, documentation for this program is in 
the file MEMMAP.DOC.  These problems can apperar as run-time errors of 
all kinds. 

At this stage, the only additional problems I have encountered arise 
from faulty discs, which misread.  A particular problem occurs with 
discs formatted as 360K but written-to using 1.2M (/AT compatible) 
floppy disc:Errordrives.Back-up

ALWAYS KEEP AT LEAST ONE BACK-UP COPY OF THE WHOLE DISC


APPENDIX A:  THE MECHANISMS AND RATE EQUATIONS

A number of mechanisms contribute to deformation.  They are fully-
described in ref.1 by Frost and Ashby (1982).  

Each mechanism can be modelled to give a rate-equation which 
defines the contribution of that mechanism to the current strain rate.  
they are central to the way the program works.  rate equation 
consitutive equationEach has the form:

eps-dot	=	f(S, T, parameters)	(1)

where eps-dot is the steady-state strain rate, S is the stress, and T 
the temperature.  There are 12 rate equations in all.

The program evaluates the rate equations at each temperature step and 
several iterations are required to locate each strain-rate contour.  
the number of temperature steps is set by variable 17.

The equations for deformation are taken directly from the book by 
Frost and Ashby (1982).  The five important mechanisms are:

(a)	Obstacle controlled glide (OBSTCLE)

(b)	Vacancy diffusion through the volume of the grains (V-DIFF)

(c)	Vacancy diffusion along grain boundaries (B-DIFF)

(d)	Power-law creep, both low-temperature and high-temperature 
varieties

(e)	Harper-Dorn creep, another dislocation mechanism

(f)	Phonon dragand electron drag controlled glide

(g)	Peierl's stress controlled glide

(h)	Dynamic recrystallization.

The equations are summarized here.  There are a few slight changes and 
additions to the rate equations as published by Frost and Ashby and 
these are noted below in context.  The rate equations are listed in 
Table A1, most have the form of equation (1).  The symbols are defined 
in Table A2.

	TABLE A1: EQUATIONS FOR STRAIN RATE

Obstacle controlled glide 



Volume diffusion



Boundary Diffusion


Power-law creep high-temperature 


Power-law creep low-temperature 


Harper-Dorn creep


Phonon dragand electron drag controlled glide


Peierls stress controlled glide



Dynamic recrystallization


APPENDIX B:  SCALING RELATIONS

The properties of a material are not independent of each other.  
Metals with high melting points have high moduli, high surface 
energies and (at a given absolute temperature) low rates of diffusion.  
Alloys with high yield strengths generally have high creep strengths.  
Detailed studies of these correlations lead to scaling relations 
which allow estimates to be made of some material properties when 
others are known.  Scaling rlations are used in the program in two 
ways:

(a)	To check all data entered by the user.  If the data do not lie 
within the expected limits, a DATA CHECK data checkmessage is 
displayed on the screen, and is printed (with more details) when a 
printout is requested.

(b)	To estimate data when real experimental values cannot be found.  
When a zero (0) is entered in teh table of material parameters when 
Creating or Editing a data set, the program automatically calls on 
these relations to estimate a value for the unknown datum.default 
values estimate data set:Creating data set:Editing  The 
value is, of course, only an estimate, but it is of the right order of 
magnitude and it allows the user to get started.  Then he or she can 
adjust the estimated parameters to give a good fit to experimental 
deformation data, as described in section 6.  (If zeros are entered 
when creating or editing the map Variables the program again estimates 
sensible values indeed the best way to start is to enter zeros for 
all the Variables.)Variable Parameter
This appendix lists the scaling relations used in the program.  The 
interested reader will find details of their origin, and more 
sophisticated methods, described in Frost and Ashby (1982, Chapter 18) 
and in Brown and Ashby (1980a, b).

The same scaling relations are used for all materials, but the scaling 
parameters are different for different isomechanical classes of 
materials.Parameter:Scaling
1. The melting point Tm, Young's modulus E and atomic 
volume OMEGA of metals and ceramics are related by:

E	=	100 k Tm / OMEGA	(B1)

where k is Boltzmann's constant (1.38 x 10-23 J/K).  The error seldom 
exceeds 35%.

2. The temperature dependence of the modulus:Temperature-
dependence of metals and ceramics, when normalised in the way shown 
in the next equation, almost always lies in the range -0.1 to -0.95.  
CHecking is based on this range estimation uses:

(Tm/u0).(du/dT)	=	 - C0		(B2)

(the minus sign is omitted in entering the data - the program inserts 
it automatically).  Different isomechanical classes have different 
values for C0, e.g.

0.5	for body-centred cubic transition metals

0.1	for tetrahedrally-bonded semiconductors

3. The yield strengths of materials in comparable states of purity 
scale as the modulus, that isyielding

Sy	=	C1 E				(B3)

For commercially pure metals (those with an impurity level of perhaps 
0.1 atom %), C1 is about 1/1000.  For heavily alloyed metals it can 
rise to 1/100 and for ceramics it can be as high as 1/50.alloying 
purity

4. The activation energy for volume diffusion, Qv, is related 
to the melting temperature by

Qv/RTm	=	C2				(B4)

where R is the gas constant and C2 is about 18 for metals and 25 for 
ceramics.  The value is quite well defined for quite subtle 
distinctions between isomechanical classes, and these are used in the 
program.

5. The pre-exponential, D0v, is found from the observation that the 
melting point :Diffusivitydiffusivity, for a given class of solid, 
is given approximately by:

Dv(Tm) / Omega2/3	=	C3			(B5)

where C3 is about 107 s-1.

6. Boundary diffusion parameters are estimated by a similar 
procedure.  For the activation energy 

Qb/RTm	=	C4				(B6)

where C4 is about 11 for metals about 15 for simple ceramics.  This 
usually corresponds to the approximation

Qb	=	0.6 Qv				(B7)

The pre-exponential is estimated from

dD0b	=	2 Omega1/3 D0v		(B8)

6. Power-law creep is described in the following way.  We start 
with the conventional description

eps-dot	=	A.Sn.exp -(Qplc/RT)	(B9)

where n and A are creep constants.  Define Sref as the stress which 
will cause a uniaxial strain rate of 10-6 s-1 at a temperature of 
exactly one half the absolute melting point (T=Tm/2):

106	=	A.Srefn.exp -(2Qplc/RTm)	(B9)

Dividing the first by the second gives

eps-dot	=	10-6.(S/Sref)n.exp -{(Qplc/RTm). (T/Tm - 2)}
	(B9)

This is the form of the creep equation used by the program for high-
temperature power-law creep.  Its great advantage is that it 
minimizes extrapolation errors (because creep testing, typically, is 
carried out at temperatures around or higher than Tm/2 and involves 
strain rates of 10-6 s-1), and it makes checking simpler (because Sref 
is usually of the order of Sy/2).

The creep exponent, if unknown, is best estimated by

n	=	3				(B10)

(but see Brown and Ashby (1980a, b) and Derby and Ashby (1987) for 
more information on this point.)  The activation energy for creep is 
for many materials the same as that for volume diffusion

Qplc	=	Qv				(B11)

The reference :Stressstress Sref, defined as above, is 
conveniently read from a deformation mechanism map.  (Remember to 
convert shear stress to uniaxial stress if necessary by 
multiplying by 1.732).  When asked for a reference stress, if you 
reply with a zero (0), a secondary menu will appear in which you can 
enter a uniaxial stress, a uniaxial strain-rate and a temperature.  
This will calculate the reference stress for you.  If you reply with 
zeros to all three of these, then the estimate of Sy/2 will be used, 
taking Sy from the obstacle-controlled flow stress.yielding  
You should be aware that for certain creep-resistant alloys, 
particularly the superalloys, Sref can be greater than Sy.  This 
is not as silly as it sounds: it is caused by the fact that creep is 
neglible at Tm/2 in these alloys.

APPENDIX C:  DATA, DATA SETS AND SOURCES

Developing an accurate parameter data set 
:Sourcesreference:Text(that is, a set of the material parameters 
listing in section 5.2) for a material is an iterative process.  The 
starting point is data for the properties of the bulk solid.  For some 
materials (like pure copper) these are well-established, the 
problem is simply that of finding them.  For others (like Y-Ba-
CuO) the proerties have to be estimated by the methods outlined in 
Appendix B.  But the data have to be "tuned" in the way described in 
Section 6 of the text, and illustrated in the case studies.

The data provided with the program gives starting point values for 22 
materials.  The data given here provides only a first estimate for a 
given material.  No confidence should be placed in this data without 
first checking original sources yourself.  It is supplied to show you 
what to expect, and tuning should involve only relatively small 
changes in the parameters.

This section gives the parameter data sets in the order given in Table 
C1, and gives sources.  Often, once source lists most of the 
properties - then the single source is quoted.  Where data have been 
assembled from several sources, details are given.

REFERENCES

data set :Sourcesreference:Text

	American Institute of Physics Handbook (1972) 3rd edition, 
Am. Inst. of Phys. and McGraw-Hill.

[Ash75]	Ashby, M.F. (1975) Acta Metall. 11 591.

	ASM Metals Handbook (1975), Vol.8 8th edition, American 
Society for Metals, Metals Park, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

[Bro80a]	Brown, A.M. and Ashby, M.F. (1980) Acta Metall. 28 1085.

[Bro80b]	Brown, A.M. and Ashby, M.F. (1980) Scripta Metall. 14 1297

	Diffusion Data (1968 to present) a journal taken by most 
science libraries.

[Fro82]	Frost, H.J. and Ashby, M.F. (1982) "Deformation Mechanism 
Maps", Pergamon Press, Oxford.

	Landholt-Bornstein Tables III-1 (1966) and III-2 (1969), 
SPringer-Verlag, Berlin.

[Mal80]	Malakondaiah, G.A. (1980) Ph.D. thesis, Banares Hindu 
University, Varanesi, India.

	Metals handbook (1961) Vol.1, ASM, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

[Sim71]	Simmons, G. and Wang, H. (1971) "Single Crystal Elastic 
Constants and Calculated Aggregate properties", 2nd edition, MIT 
Press.


INDEX


<Alt><W> 10

<Ctrl><Alt><Del> 17

<Ctrl><Break> 17, 18

<PRT SCR> 16

Activation energy 2, 7, 10, 14, 
21, 22

alloying 21

AT&T 18

Atomic volume 2, 7, 8, 10, 21

AUTOEXEC.BAT 19

axes 15

Back-up 19

Batch files 5

Borland 17

Boundary diffusion 7, 22

Burger's vector 14

^C 6, 12

See <Ctrl><Break> 12

CGA 4, 5, 18

check 9, 11, 14, 17, 18

Class

See Isomechanical Class 7

colour 4, 11

Command line 6, 12

comments 10

Compaq 4, 18

CONFIG.SYS 19

consitutive equation 20

contours

Multiplying factor 15

Number of 15

Strain rate 15

Temperature 15

Temperature Difference 15

COPPER 13, 23

COPPER            7

Core diffusion 7, 10, 14

Creep 7, 10

Creep exponent 2, 14, 22

data check 9, 10, 11, 18, 21

Data set 9, 12, 13

Corrupted 17

Creating 6, 8, 12, 21

Deleting 11

Duplicating 6, 11, 12

Editing 7, 8, 11, 21

Pre-existing 7

Reading 4, 6, 9, 12

Same 11

Saving 16, 19

Sources 23

date 15

default values 5, 15, 18, 21

Diffusion

Cut-off stress 8, 10

See Volume, Boundary, Core 13

Disc

See Hard-disc, Floppy disc 19

dislocation 16, 20

Dislocation core diffusion

See core diffusion 2

Drag 8, 10, 16

EGA 4, 18

Electron drag 8, 10, 20

End 12

Epson 9

error 18, 19

error  18

estimate 21

exit 12

exponent 14

fields 15

Finish 8, 10, 12

floppy disc 4, 5, 17

Error 19

Full 19

Fortran 13

glide 16, 20

Grain boundary diffusion

See Boundary diffusion 2

Grain size 2, 15

Graph-Plus 18

graphics 3, 4, 5, 17, 18

GRAPHICS.COM 5, 17, 18

hard-disc 3, 4, 5, 17

Full 19

Hardware

See Printer, Graphics 4

Harper-Dorn creep 20

help screen 6, 12

Hercules 4, 18

Hewlett-Packard 4

HGC.COM 18

homologous temperature 15

IBM 4

isomechanical 9

Isomechanical Class 7, 10, 13, 
21

laserjet 4, 9

Lattice diffusion

See Volume diffusion 2

listing 9

To a file 5

To a printer 5

map Variable

See Variable 14

material name 15

material Parameter

See Parameter 13

mechanism 15, 20

Melting point 2, 7, 10, 13, 21

Diffusivity 22

MEMMAP.COM 17, 19

memory 5, 17, 19

MGC.COM 18

MODE command 17

Modulus 7, 10, 14, 21

Temperature-dependence 21

MS-DOS 5, 17, 18

Version 4, 18

NICKEL 7, 13

obstacles 16

Olivetti 5, 18

options

See Command line 5

Parameter 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 
21, 23

Scaling 21

Pascal

See Turbo Pascal 4

Peierl's stress 20

Peierls stress 2, 16, 20

Phase change 10

Phonon drag 8, 10, 16, 20

POTASSIUM 7

Power-Law Breakdown 10

power-law creep 2, 15, 16, 20, 
22

printer 4, 5, 10, 11, 17, 18

printout 21

See Listing 8

Program 5

purity 21

quit 6, 11, 12

RAM 4

rate equation 20

recrystallization 16

Reference

Stress 2, 7, 10, 14, 23

Text 10, 23

ROCKSALT 13

ROCKSALT                  7

Run-time 18

scaling relations 21

shear stress 15, 23

SILICON 7, 13

software 4

steps 14, 20

strain rate 15

superalloys 23

Temperature 2, 10, 15

Turbo Pascal 4, 17

uniaxial stress 23

variable 8, 12, 14, 15, 21

VGA 4, 18

Volume diffusion 7, 10, 21

Y-Ba-CuO 7, 13, 23

yielding 15, 16, 21, 23

.End Index.





